\documentclass{article}

\usepackage{amsmath,amssymb,amsthm}
\usepackage{url}
\usepackage{hyperref}
\usepackage{proof}
\usepackage{stmaryrd}
%\usepackage{MnSymbol}
\usepackage{parskip}
\usepackage{fullpage}
\usepackage{mathpartir}
\usepackage{subcaption}
\usepackage{float}


\begin{document}

\include{definitions}

\title{Proposal for Basing Bend2 on W-Types}

\author{Aaron Stump}

\maketitle

\section{Bend2's Philosophy}

Bend2 is based on a novel proposal (as far as I know) for how to
design a type theory, which is a form of pure functional programming
language that can also be viewed as a logic.  To be sound as a logic,
the language should not allow one to prove False.

There are two current traditions for devising type theories, that
should be mentioned for comparison with Bend2's approach:

\begin{enumerate}
\item \textbf{Church-style} type theory builds up a notion of typed
  terms (programs), where the types are inherent to those terms.  By a
  difficult argument, one shows that all well-typed programs
  terminate.  So the type system is enforcing termination, in addition
  to other properties usually enforced by static typing.  From
  termination, it is then easy to argue that the system is logically
  sound.  This is because it is relatively easy to show that values,
  which are the final results of computation, cannot have type False.

\item \textbf{Curry-style} type theory starts with a notion of
  type-free program, and then adds types to describe properties of the
  behavior of programs.  For example, the identity function can be
  described as having type $X \to X$ for any type $X$, as it is
  guaranteed to take an input of type $X$ and return an output of type
  $X$ (namely, the input it was given).  A difficult argument is still
  required to show that typing enforces termination.  But the language
  design is made quite a bit easier by not having types be inherent
  parts of programs.  This is because in reasoning about programs,
  one does not then have to reason about types inside them.  Programs
  are type-free, and typing comes second.  In fact, the slogan I propose
  for this style of type theory is ``Computation First'' (because we
  first explain what type-free programs are and how they execute, and
  only afterwards use types to describe their properties).
\end{enumerate}

Bend2's philosophy can be viewed as a strengthened form of Curry-style
type theory, with the modified slogan: ``Terminating Computation
First''.  The idea, proposed by Victor Taelin, is similar to
Curry-style type theory, where one first defines type-free programs,
and how they compute.  But differently, these programs are designed so
that they are guaranteed to terminate, without reference to any notion
of typing.  Just the structure of the programs and the rules for how
the execute are sufficient to establish that all programs terminate.
Giving a detailed proof of that fact is still not trivial, but
expected to be much simpler than the approaches based on typing.  And
then one has a lot of freedom to design a type system on top of the
terminating type-free language.  Now the only requirement is that the
language should have the usual type-safety property that ones expects
of any statically typed programming language. This is vastly easier to
achieve than crafting a type system that enforces termination.

\section{Bend2's notion of terminating type-free programs}

As it exists currently, Bend2's terminating language is based on a
notion of sizes of values, where values are built from tuples
(including the empty tuple, which is just the unit value familiar from
other functional programming) using labels.  A list, for example, is
just a nested tuple with labels through the nesting that indicate
whether the tuple represents an empty list (and hence has no more
data), or adding an element to the head of another list (which is then
contained inside this tuple).  Terminating recursions operating on
such data just need to be structurally recursive: all recursive calls
should happen on subdata of the input.  Anonymous functions are
restricted to being \emph{affine}, which means they may use their
inputs either one time or not at all.  These restrictions individually
are well-known to enforce termination of type-free programs, and in
combination they should continue to enforce termination (this may be
known, but I am not aware of a proof).

This representation of data as nested tuples is appealingly simple.
It does have the drawback that data need to have a finite size.  In
type theory, however, it is common to work with data structures that
are infinitely branching, but where each branch is finite.  Such
structures do not have a finite size.  One can extend finite sizes to
the ordinals, and then cover such cases.  In fact, ordinals are a
classic (if theoretically motivated) example of such a datatype:

\begin{verbatim}
data Ord = Zero | Succ | Lim (Nat -> Ord)
\end{verbatim}

\noindent The \verb|Lim| constructor has an infinite number of
subtrees, one for each natural number.  This infinite set of subtrees
is represented by having \verb|Lim| accept a function (call it
\verb|f|) from \verb|Nat| to \verb|Ord|.  Given natural number
\verb|i|, the function \verb|f| returns the \verb|i|'th subtree.

Basing a test for structural decrease of programs using ordinals might
be possible, but I do not know of an example of this.  It would
require defining some suitable class of ordinals, and then testing
functions for decrease with respect to that class.  I am not sure how
one would be able to do that in a type-free way, as I am not sure how
one would check, just by seeing how code is manipulating part of a
data structure, that the ordinal measure of the entire data structure
is being decreased.

\section{W-types for general structurally terminating recursion}

An alternative -- which might possibly be viewed as the correct way of
achieving some kind of implicit form of ordinal decrease as just
described -- is to use so-called W-types, proposed by the great type
theorist Per Martin-L\"of (see~\cite[Chapter 15]{mlttprog} for an
introduction).  Of course, with Bend2's strengthened Curry-style
philosophy, we begin not with the types of this proposal, but just the
type-free programs.  There are two constructs, one for constructing
values, and the other for recursing over them.

\subsection{Construction and recursion}

A construction consists of a \emph{label} $l$ and then a function $f$
producing the subdata.  Each input to $f$ is like a name or index for
a piece of subdata, and given that name, $f$ returns the corresponding
subdata.  So for the example above of \verb|Lim| for ordinals, the
name would be a natural number $i$, and the subdata would be the
$i$'th ordinal contained in that limit ordinal.  Let us write
$\ctor{l}{f}$ for this construction with label $l$ and function $f$.
So it is effectively a pair, but the second argument is always a
function.

To recurse over such a value, we write a function $R$ which takes the
label $l$, the function $f$, and also a function $r$ that returns
recursive results.  $R$ then returns a result, generally by calling
$r$ to obtain results recursively.  For each possible input to $f$,
the function $r$ returns the result of recursing on the subdata
$f\ i$; that is, the $i$'th piece of subdata.  The recursor itself
takes in $R$ and a piece $d$ of data, decomposes that data into $l$ and $f$,
and then invokes $r$.  In more detail, let us write $\wrec{R}{d}$
for this.  Then the computation rule is:

\[
\wrec{R}{\ctor{l}{f}} \ \ = \ \ R\ l\ f\ (\lam{x}{\wrec{R}{(f\ x)}})
\]

\section{Examples}

\section{Adding types}

\bibliographystyle{plain}
\bibliography{main}

\end{document}
